BIBLICAL
Abraham's Sacrafice - Abraham was ready to honor his promise to God and sacrafice his son.  At the last minute, God provided a way of escape for Abraham, a ram appeared.  Isaac was spared, and Abraham received the Lord’s blessing.  Symbolic of one’s willingness to make the ultimate sacrifice to demonstrate his obedience and his faith in God.

Absolom – a son who brings heartache to his father; from the third son of David, King of Israel. Exiled for three years before he was allowed to return to the court
or see his royal father, Absolom plotted to cause a rebellion against his father to overtake the kingdom because he heard Solomon was to succeed David. When Absolom was killed in battle, King David grieved for his son in spite of his treachery against him

Alpha and Omega - The beginning and the end, from a quote in Revelations in the New Testament

Antedeluvian - Latin for “before the flood,” referring to the flood Noah rode out in Genesis. Something very old or outdated is sometimes exaggeratedly called antedeluvian.

Cain- a brother who kills a brother; from the story of Adam and Eve’s son Cain, who killed his brother Abel out of jealousy

Daniel – one known for wisdom and accurate judgment; from a wise leader in the Old Testament who was able to read the handwriting on the wall

David and Bathsheba – represents a big sin; from King David’s affair with Bathsheba, the wife of Uriah. After they had an affair and she became pregnant, David had
her husband Uriah put on the front lines of battle so he would die. The "Bathsheba Affair" formed a critical turning point in King David's life. Prior to this, he had
prospered greatly, but afterward, his personal fortunes were greatly diminished. Nathan the prophet confronted David after he took Bathsheba for his wife and trapped
him into admitting his own guilt.

Eye of the Needle - A very difficult task; from famous narrow gateway called “the needle.” In the NT, Jesus said it was easier for a camel to go through the eye of the
needle than for a rich man to enter heaven. Filthy Lucre - Money or profits; from a story in the NT of Jesus casting moneylenders out of the Temple

Forbidden Fruit – See the Two Trees or Garden of Eden, anything tempting but potentially dangerous; original sin; loss of innocence

Garden of Eden - the original place of earth; a perfect world

Goliath – a large person; from the giant from the Philistine city of Gath, slain by David, when he was a shepherd boy

Good Samaritan – someone who helps another person, perhaps someone of a different race or background; from a NT parable about a Samaritan, a traditional enemy of the Hebrews, who stopped to help a Jewish man who had been beaten and left for dead at the side of the road.

Handwriting on the wall – what the future holds; from the OT story of Daniel, who was able to accurately predict some mysterious writing that appeared on a wall (translated, it predicted the imminent death of the king) Ishmael – one who is cast out as being unworthy; the son of Abraham and his handmaiden Hagar, he was cast
out into the desert when his wife Sarah had their son Isaac; therefore said to be the ancestor of the nomadic desert tribes of Arabs

Jacob - grandson of Abraham, son of Isaac and Rebekah, brother of Esau, and the traditional ancestor of Israelites. His name was changed to Israel, and his 12 sons became the 12 Tribes of Israel.

Jacob’s ladder – the angels of God ascending and descending a ladder from earth to heaven. God, who stood at the top, promised to bless Jacob and his offspring and to bring his descendants into the Promised Land. It means a path to God or heaven

Job/Patience of Job - who who suffers a great deal but remains faithful; from an OT character whose faith in God was tested by Satan; though he lost his family and belongings, he remained patient and faithful

Job's comforters – “friends” who try to help by bringing blame; ironically, Job’s "comforters" didn't comfort at all but were the source of more affliction.

Jonah – one who brings bad luck; an OT prophet who ran from God and sailed to sea. When a storm arose, he admitted that he was the cause, and the sailors threw him overboard, where he was swallowed by a large fish.

Judas – (n) a traitor or a treacherous kiss (a Judas kiss); one of the 12 Apostles, notorious for betraying Jesus. His surname in Latin means "murderer" or "assassin." Judas disclosed Jesus' whereabouts to the chief priests and elders for thirty pieces of silver

Killing the fatted calf - (See the prodigal son) The prodigal son's father calls for a fatted calf to be killed for the welcoming feast. Killing the fatted calf is now used as an expression for sparing no expense on a celebration.

King Ahab and Jezabel – an evil king of Israel and his treacherous evil wife, synonymous today with evil. Through her marriage to Ahab, Jezebel introduced the worship of Baal, an idol, to Israel, inciting mutual enmity with the prophets. She instigated the murder Naboth for the possession of a vineyard. Today Jezebel means a brazen or forward woman

Kiss of death - (See Judas) A kiss of death is an act of betrayal, or any action which causes another's downfall.

Lamp under a bowl

Manna – a sustaining life-giving source or food; from the sweetish bread-like food that fell from heaven for the Israelites as they crossed the Sinai Desert to the Promised Land with Moses

Original Sin/The Fall – the idea that all men are innately sinful as a result of Adam and Eve’s fall from the state of innocence. When they ate of the forbidden fruit, they were cast out of the Biblical Garden of Eden; a post-biblical expression for the doctrine of Adam's transgression and mankind's consequential inheritance of a sinful nature because he ate the forbidden fruit from the Tree of Knowledge.


Pearl of Great Price – something so precious that one would devote everything to or give up everything for it. In one of Jesus' parables, the kingdom of heaven is compared to a pearl of great price, or value, found by a merchant

Philistine – a person indifferent or hostile to the arts and refinement; from Sea-going people from Crete who became enemies of the Israelites and fought over their lands

Prodigal Son – a wasteful son who disappoints his father; from the NT parable of a man with two sons. When he split his estate between the two, the younger son gathered his fortune and left home to live the wild life, while the older son stayed home to work in the fields. When the younger son spent all of the money, he
came crawling back to his father, who accepted him, pardoning his error by saying he was “lost but was found.”

Ruth and Naomi – paragons of love between in-laws; faithful friends. From the OT story of Ruth, who, when her husband died in battle, left her own land to travel with his mother back to her people.

Samson and Delilah - Treacherous love story. Samson, an Israelite hero and legendary warrior with extraordinary physical strength, fell in love with Delilah, a Philistine. When Delilah learned that Samson's hair was the source of his strength, she betrayed him by excepting a Philistine bribe to cut off his hair while he slept. Today the name Delilah is associated with a voluptuous, treacherous woman.

Scapegoat - (n) one that is made an object of blame for others; the goat was symbolically burdened with the sins of Jewish people and thrown over a precipice outside of Jerusalem to rid the nation of iniquities.

Sepulcher – tomb in the OT

Sodom and Gomorrah – any place associated with wickedness or sin; from the evil cities of the OT that were destroyed by fire 

Solomon – an extremely wise person; from the son of King David, the Israelite king who wrote Proverbs, and was known for wisdom

Thirty pieces of silver - Judas was paid thirty pieces of silver for betraying Jesus. Payment for any treacherous act is now referred to as thirty pieces of silver, or blood money.

The Tower of Babel - Tower built by the descendants of Noah, Intended for it to reach heaven, increase their reputation, and make them like God. God prevents them from completing the tower by giving them different languages.  To “babel” - is to speak incoherently; confusion, noise

Tree of Life - See Garden of Eden, the tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil, and the Tree of Life, possibly symbolizing two choices one can make

Twelve Tribes of Israel - according to the Old Testament, the Hebrew people took possession of the Promised Land of Canaan after the death of Moses and named the tribes after the sons and grandson of Jacob (whose name was changed to Israel): Reuben, Simeon, Judah, Issachar, Zebulum, Gad, Asher, Dan, Naphtali, Joseph, Manasseh, and Ephraim. 

Lamp under a bowl (parable) - 

Wise and foolish builders (parable) - 

New cloth on an old coat (parable) - 

new wine in old wineskins (parable) - 

Sower and the soils (parable) - 

Weeds (parable) - 

Mustard seed (parable) - 

Yeast (parable) - 

Hidden treasure (parable) - 

Valuable pearl (parable) - 

p 1568 bible


FINISH http://webcache.googleusercontent.com/search?q=cache:AB9_45dUPlwJ:teacherweb.com/GA/TattnallSquareAcademy/Kitchings/BIBLICAL-ALLUSIONS.doc+&cd=6&hl=en&ct=clnk&gl=us